@node Files, Repository, Commands, Top
@chapter Files
This chapter is about relevant files that affect pacstall's operations.

@menu
* Repository:: Files related to retrieving, updating, and searching packages.
* Updating:: Files relating to updating pacstall.
@end menu

@node Repository, pacstallrepo, Files,
@section Repository
These files relate to dealing with retrieving, updating, and searching packages.

@menu
* pacstallrepo:: Repository configuration file.
* pacstallrepo: repo_url. URL configuration.
* pacstallrepo: alias. Aliasing URLS.
@end menu

@node pacstallrepo, repo_url, Repository, Repository
@subsection pacstallrepo
The file @file{/usr/share/pacstall/repo/pacstallrepo} is a flat-file configuration format where keys are newline separated.

@float Example pacstallrepo file
@example
@var{url} @@@var{alias}
@end example
@caption{@ref{repo_url} and @ref{alias}}
@end float

@node repo_url, , pacstallrepo, Repository
@subsubsection repo_url
Any URL used must allow following by path structures (i.e., @file{/packages/foo/foo.pacscript}). The URL does not need to be accessible in its raw form, so long as it works with the full URL (base + @file{path/to/wherever}).

@node alias, , pacstallrepo, Repository
@subsubsection alias
Aliases are used by the installing, searching, and removing functionality of pacstall. They offer a way to shorten the amount of text one must type to complete certain operations. The only requirement is that they are only composed of ASCII characters.

@node Updating, pacstallrepo, Files,
@section Updating
These files are used to update pacstall.

@menu
* update:: Update file.
@end menu

@node update, , Updating, Updating
@subsection update
The file @file{/usr/share/pacstall/repo/update} is a flat-file configuration format.

@float Example update file
@example
@var{pacstall} @var{master}
@end example
@end float

It takes two values separated by a space:

The first is the username on @url{https://github.com, GitHub}. The repository name from whatever user is chosen must be 'pacstall'.

The second value is a branch name.
